[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're off the coast of the
southernmost tip of Japan.
I've come to investigate
an underwater mystery that
could simply rewrite history.
This looks like a
temple, but the last time
it was above water
was 10,000 years ago.
If it is man-made, it's
the oldest known structure
on Earth.
I believe it could prove
the existence of a lost
civilization.
My search begins in Cambodia,
1,000 miles south of Japan.
I'm at the great
temple of Angkor Wat.
I'm here with the photographer,
Santha Faiia, my wife,
to record an astronomical effect
that occurs only twice a year.
On the 21st of March and
the 21st of September,
when night and day
are of equal length,
Angkor lights up like
a fairytale kingdom.
At dawn we can witness
the brilliant planning
of the master architects
and astronomers who
suddenly appeared in Cambodia
just over 1,000 years ago.
This mysterious southeast
Asian civilization
has unexplained similarities
to a civilization ancient Egypt
and ancient Mexico.
I've come here to
look for answers
to a series of questions
raised by my research.
For example, all three of
these supposedly unconnected
civilizations used pyramids
in their sacred architecture.
All three worshipped
kings as gods.
The religion of all
three focused on a quest
for the immortality
of the human soul.
The priests of all three were
sophisticated astronomers
with advanced knowledge of
the cycles of the stars.
Is it a coincidence
that poisonous snakes
were sacred here, just as they
were in ancient Egypt, just
as they were in ancient Mexico?
Finally, is it a coincidence
that all three regions
were believed by their
inhabitants to contain
a hidden image of the heavens?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For 10 years I've been
trying to piece together
a puzzle drawn from every
corner of the ancient world.
I became interested
when I realized
just how similar many of
these ancient cultures were,
even though they were
living at different times
and were often separated
by huge expanses of ocean.
All sought to reach for the sky.
All align their monuments
to the stars and the sun.
Now modern technology is helping
us to fathom their purpose.
It turns out they were
copying images of the sky
into the ground.
Long before the
mysterious buildings
appeared in Cambodia, the
ancient Egyptians aligned
their temples to the
sun on special days.
I've come to the Temple
of Karnak in Upper Egypt.
Like a sniper's rifle,
its long, narrow access
targets the sun at dawn
on the winter solstice,
the 21st of December, the
shortest day of the year.
What we've just witnessed
is a piece of cosmic magic,
a spell cast almost
4,000 years ago
by the master
astronomers and master
architects of ancient Egypt.
It astonishes me
that Egyptologists so
despise and so underestimate
the ancient Egyptians
that they can only see
this magnificent effect
as some sort of accident,
some sort of coincidence.
It wasn't a coincidence.
By connecting the axis
of Karnak so precisely
to the rising sun on
the winter solstice,
the ancient Egyptians were
trying to join ground and sky.
The effect is to transform
the entire temple
into a gateway to the
heavens, and that's
precisely what they called
it in their religious texts.
To get to grips with
the Egyptian obsession
with the sky, we need to travel
100 miles north to Dendera,
built 2,000 years ago.
Dendera is an
astronomical temple.
It stands on the
foundations of a series
of much earlier temples.
Continuous rebuilding
on ancient sites
meant that very old
ideas were constantly
re-expressed in new forms.
These ideas were traced back
by the Egyptians themselves
to the remote Golden Age
called the First Time
and to a single temple believed
to have been built by the gods.
This whole temple was
modeled on a precise region
of the sky known as the Duat.
The Duat occupied
a special place
in ancient Egyptian religion.
It was the place
through which our souls
must travel after death.
It was ruled over
by the god Osiris
and identified with specific
constellations of stars,
so the ancient Egyptians
saw sacred knowledge of it
through the study of astrology.
Covering every square
inch of the ceiling
are images of all 12 of the
constellations of the zodiac.
As every follower
of astrology knows,
there are 12 constellations
or collections
of stars known as the zodiac.
The zodiac can be visualized
as a giant belt which
surrounds us.
Because the Earth moves
around the sun, each month
as the sun rises, we see
a different constellation
like Cancer the crab
or Leo the lion.
I believe that knowledge of the
zodiac expressed in this temple
was present in Egypt
from the earliest times.
>> Well, I think there's no
question from the evidence that
we have, particularly in the
monuments because they are
the most enduring record, that
their knowledge of the cosmos,
of the stars, the star patterns,
the cycles of the cosmos,
was enormous and exact.
We have enough evidence
today to verify that.
The way that the ancients
reflected that information
was in a picture thinking
or a mythological thinking.
For them there was
no contradiction,
as there is for us, between
exact astronomical knowledge
and mythological
stories because they
thought in a mythological way.
That's the way
their brains worked.
>> The ideas we find at Dendera
appear 1,000 years earlier
in the tombs of the
Valley of the Kings.
Entering into the burial
chamber of Seti the First,
one of the great
pharaohs of Egypt,
what immediately strikes
me is the profusion
of astronomical
symbolism everywhere.
An astronomical ceiling
lies over the burial place
itself, a ceiling
populated by star gods
and by symbols of
constellations still in forms
that are recognizable today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Who could doubt that the
ancient Egyptians conceived
their afterlife journey as
being made amongst the stars?
To the north, in the deserts
outside modern Cairo,
are even earlier
astronomical clues.
1,500 years before
the first tombs
were built in the
Valley of the Kings,
the ancient Egyptians expressed
their astronomical wisdom
in gigantic pyramids.
The step Pyramid of
Djoser is supposedly
the oldest in Egypt, the place
where pyramid building began
about 5,000 years ago.
It's one of a group of important
pyramids sited that Saqqara,
about 30 miles south of the
more famous pyramids of Giza.
The interior of the
Pyramid of the pharaoh Unas
is inscribed with
extraordinary texts that
offer a key to Egypt's mystery.
Entering this secret underworld,
the first thing you observe
is that there are
stars everywhere.
The ceiling is covered in stars.
And this tells us that
the ancient Egyptian idea
of the afterlife was not a
place of darkness and death,
but a place of light and
immortality in the heavens.
It's a kind of a
chapel of knowledge
because inscribed on the
walls are the oldest surviving
scriptures of mankind.
These texts were written down
more than 4,300 years ago
from original
documents now long lost
and from oral
traditions stretching
far back beyond the
memory of historians.
If we want to reach out
and connect ourselves
to the world of spiritual
ideas of our ancestors,
to the forgotten past
of mankind, then surely
this is the link.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Is it possible that we're
looking at the legacy of a lost
civilization here?
Oh, Osiris the
King, you have gone.
But you will return.
You have slept,
but you will awake.
You have died,
but you will live.
The tomb is opened for you.
The doors of the coffin
are drawn back for you.
The doors of the sky
are thrown open for you.
These texts are describing the
journey of the pharaoh's soul
to the domain of Osiris
in the stars, to the Duat.
Duat lay close to the
constellation of Orion,
which the Egyptians saw as
the image of their god Osiris.
The Duat's sign in hieroglyphs
was a star within a circle.
Egyptologists translate
the hieroglyphs literally
as a series of magical spells.
They don't accept that
beneath the symbols
there's an astronomical
message, albeit one in code.
Yet, when we put these
text side by side
with the uninscribed
Great Pyramids of Giza,
the code can be broken.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In 1994, the Belgian
engineer Robert Bauval
published the details
of an amazing discovery
which overturned a
century of scholarship.
Bauval showed that some
of the oldest pyramids
were laid out to match the
patterns of significant stars.
Bauval is taking me to
the pyramid of Sneferu,
the father of Khufu, who built
the Great Pyramid of Giza.
The architects who built
all these structures
belonged to an elite
school of priests.
It was a cult based
in Heliopolis,
long since buried under the
suburbs of modern Cairo.
>> The priests of Heliopolis
who designed these projects were
servicing a very important
cult, the belief that Egypt was
in the image of heaven, that
the whole land of Egypt was
a magical, cosmic land, and that
the pharaoh was representative
of the cosmic
order on this land.
Now, a pharaoh was considered
to be the son of Osiris
living on Earth.
When he died, he
joined back the gods
in the sky, the
cosmic land, which
was in the image of Egypt.
And it is in this
context that we
have to understand what
they were trying to do here.
>> What Bauval has done is to
re-examine the hieroglyphic
texts inscribed inside
the Pyramid of Unas.
>> The Pyramid Texts tell
us that there is a Nile
in the sky, which is
obviously the Milky Way.
Now, here imagine the
course of the Nile here.
Now, if you look--
one thing that got
me into this thing--
if you look at the pattern of
the three pyramids of Giza,
what I was looking at the
time was a peculiar offset
of the third, smaller pyramid
to the left of the diagonal
of the first two.
And the minute I compared
the map of the three payments
to the three star of the
belt of Orion, suddenly
I saw a pattern.
>> It seems almost an
extraordinary idea that
they're bringing the
sky down to the ground.
>> Well, that's what
Egypt was all about.
The essence of the belief
is that Egypt was itself
a cosmic land, a land that
was the mirror of heaven.
>> If the whole Giza Plateau
is a mirror of heaven,
a model of stars on the ground,
then surely its most prominent
feature, the Pharaoh
Khufu's Great Pyramid,
must be the key to
the whole design.
Most Egyptologists
believe the Great Pyramid
with its intricate network
of corridors and passageways
was built as Khufu's tomb.
I think that Khufu built it
for another purpose altogether,
a much more significant one.
And clues to that
purpose are embedded
in the architecture itself.
This is the room conventionally
known as the Queen's Chamber.
Actually, there's not
a shred of evidence
that any queen or any body was
ever buried in this chamber.
We don't know the function
of this curious corbel niche
behind me, although it reflects
a pattern found elsewhere
in the Great Pyramid.
One clue, however, may be
provided by this feature.
If you'd entered
this room in 1871,
you would have seen
a sheer blank wall.
But in 1872, an enterprising
British engineer
walked around the room tapping
on the walls with a hammer
and he found a hollow point.
And he cut through
it with a chisel
and found that there was
just five inches of stone
blocking the mouth
of this shaft.
Robert Bauval calculated
the angle of the shaft
and found that it targets a
very significant star, the star
Sirius, which the ancient
Egyptians identified
with the goddess Isis.
Isis was the mother figure
of the Egyptian gods,
so this is clearly
part of a pattern--
pyramids on the ground
matching the stars
and the connecting line between.
Isis was the wife
of Osiris, Lord
of the Duat, whose
astronomical image was
the constellation of Orion.
High up in the Great
Pyramid, what's
known as the King's Chamber
connects with his stars
in the sky.
It does so with two shafts
each precisely targeted
on significant stars.
If we travel through the Great
Pyramid in virtual reality,
we can easily see the complex
system of passages, chambers,
and shafts which remain a
baffling and unexplained
engineering feat.
And as we ascend into
the King's Chamber,
we find that it's the
southern shaft which
is the most revealing.
It points directly at
the stars of Orion's belt
as they were in 2,500 BC.
It confirms Bauval's discovery
that these three stars
are exactly reflected in the
ground plan of the three Giza
pyramids.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I believe that the Giza
pyramids are really
part of a gigantic model
of the Duat sky region.
They weren't tombs at all.
The pharaoh came
here during life
to learn about and prepare for
the journey through the Duat
that he expected to
make after death.
The Great Pyramid of
Egypt was nothing less
than a flight simulator for the
pharaoh's journey to heaven.
Angkor, Cambodia.
As in Egypt, there's evidence
that groups of temples
were built here as
models of specific stars
and linked to the
quest for immortality.
The most famous
temple, Angkor Wat,
was completed 800 years
ago, making it much later
than any Egyptian temples.
But satellite
photographs have recently
identified much earlier
constructions at Angkor.
As in Egypt, the builders
of the temples where master
astronomers and mathematicians.
Like the pyramids of
Giza, these temples
were an interface
between ground and sky.
But I think there's a
much deeper connection
between Angkor and Giza.
To prove it, I need to find
evidence of the same mirroring
of stars on the ground.
A journey into this
temple was a journey
into the mystery of
time and mathematics.
Pilgrims came here seeking
sacred enlightenment.
At each level, they
were confronted
by riddles which they must
overcome before passing on
to the next level.
Just as at Giza, the purpose was
to acquire the knowledge that
would lead to immortality.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
An American expert on
Angkor, Dr. Eleanor Mannikka,
discovered that the
ancient builders
had used a consistent
unit of measure,
which she named the qubit.
Her survey showed that
every measure here
is scaled to cycles of time
important to Hindu beliefs.
Along the causeway to
the center of the temple,
the builders mark the first age
of Hindu cosmology, 1,728,000
years, expressed
as 1,728 qubits.
That could be a coincidence,
but the site also
provides the second, third,
and fourth ages as well.
These walls contain the
longest continuous stretch
of embossed stonework anywhere.
It's a great work of art,
but it's much more than that.
It reveals as much about Angkor
as the hieroglyphs tell us
about Egypt.
This is a scene that operates at
two distinct but interconnected
levels.
On one level, it's scientific.
The other level is mythological.
The myth is called the
Churning of the Milky Ocean.
The key ingredient is
the Milky ocean itself,
the ocean upon which the entire
universe was thought to rest.
The churning post is this
mountain in the center
that we see roughly
outlined, Mt.
Mandara, one of the central
peaks of the cosmos according
to Hindu mythology, and it
rests on the body of a tortoise.
And this tortoise is an
incarnation of the god Vishnu.
And we also see Vishnu
here in human form
steadying the churning process.
The instrument of the churning
is the body of a great serpent,
a Naga serpent
called Basuki, which
is wrapped around the mountain.
This serpent is operating
like a rope that's
turning the mountain
and is pulled
in two different directions by
two different teams of pullers,
one team representing the
forces of darkness and evil,
the other team representing
the forces of good and light.
But it's not a simple matter of
one team or the other winning.
What they are actually doing--
and a profound wisdom is
concealed in this--
is cooperating towards
a common objective,
and that objective
is to generate
from the churning
of the Milky ocean
the elixir of immortality.
The scientific level of the
scene is much more complex
and it rests on
detailed observations
of the heavens carried
out by astronomers
over vast periods of time.
It represents an intricate
cycle of the stars
known as precession.
Two teams pulling
on the suit twisted
around the sacred mountain
symbolize a cycle of time
that only very
sophisticated observers
could have understood.
It is, in fact, a scientific
metaphor for the way
that the Earth spins on its
own axis in the heavens.
If you could speed up the
stars over an evening,
you would notice that they
seem to revolve around
the north pole of the sky.
This is because the earth
revolves once every 24 hours.
But the position of the
North Pole isn't fixed.
Because of a slow wobble
in the Earth's rotation
like a spinning
top, the pole moves.
It travels in a slow circle
around the still point
over 26,000 years, or one
degree every 72 years.
This cycle is known
as precession.
We can measure it now.
And incredibly, the ancients
could measure it then.
We know they could
measure precession
because they encoded
processional numbers
in the dimensions and
alignments of the temples.
It's no coincidence that there
are 72 temples at Angkor.
Nor is it a coincidence
that Angkor Wat's causeway
is exactly 3/4 of a degree
offset from due east.
In precessional terms, 3/4
of a degree takes 54 years
and we find the number 54
repeating all over Angkor.
The offset gave the
builders of Angkor
a three-day warning
of the spring equinox.
Only on the equinox, when night
and day are of equal length,
does the rising sun line
up with the central tower.
I believe the builders of
Angkor used precessional numbers
to commemorate their
most important ideas.
Immediately adjacent to
Angkor Wat is Angkor Thom.
And here, if we look,
is a clear message
transmitted from the past.
What I'm walking on
here isn't just a bridge
lined with exotic statues.
It's also a colossal
three-dimensional model
of precession.
What we have here, actually,
is a three-dimensional version
of the bas relief in Angkor Wat.
We see the Asuras, the
spirits of evil, on one side
and the spirits of
good on the other.
And what they're
pulling is that the Naga
serpent Basuki, the Naga King,
who's churning the Milky ocean.
And the Milky ocean is
actually represented
by the moat on my right there.
This churning of the Milky
ocean is a symbol of precession.
But just in case we're
in any doubt about it,
they give us the
numbers of precession--
54 figures on each side,
108 figures per bridge.
But five bridges-- and
there are five surrounding
this complex-- times 108 makes
540, all precessional numbers.
The bridge leads to
a gateway, and what
this is telling us is
that the gateway itself
and what lies beyond it
is in some way connected
to the mystery of precession.
There's a riddle here.
Angkor Thom is a vast
sacred enclosure,
measuring over five
square miles an area.
At its center is a complex
temple known as the Bayon.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The fact that it stands in
the exact geometric center
suggests that it was
of special importance
to the builders of Angkor.
There are ancient
myths which state
that in some mysterious
manner, the land of Angkor
was once believed to
be similar to the sky.
I think the Bayon represents
the still point in heaven
around which the stars circle
in that great processional cycle
of 26,000 years.
Here at the center
of the Bayon, I'm
surrounded by 54 towers, the
processional number most used
at Angkor.
It's a potent reminder that
the builders express themselves
in processional numbers.
But I believe their vision
was much grander than has
hitherto been realized.
Their project was to create
a hidden image of the heavens
in the jungles of Cambodia.
A PhD student, John Grigsby,
doing research for me,
discovered the crucial
evidence of a link
between Angkor and Giza.
He noticed that some of
the temples on the ground
matched the stars of the
constellation of Draco
in the same way that
Egypt's pyramids mapped
the stars of Orion.
What Grigsby's saying
is that the layout
of the pattern of these
pyramids on the ground
looks like the stars in
the constellation of Draco
so that Angkor Wat
would be the head
of the constellation of Draco.
Through the Bayon would be the
heart of the constellation.
You can see the body
coming up through here.
If you just joined the
dots between the temples,
then you get this long tail
extending through here.
It could be a coincidence.
It needs to work in the
sky and on the ground
at the right time.
We should be looking
for this correlation,
if it exists at all, on
the spring at Equinox
because Angkor Wat is
an equinoctial temple.
And really, we should
be looking for it
in 1150 AD, which is when
Angkor Wat was built.
So let's see what
the computer says.
OK, Draco's a northern
constellation,
so we need to look
in the northern sky.
And there is Draco.
However, it's upside down.
The head's up, the body's down.
Here we have the head
down, the body up.
It makes me feel like I
want to turn the sky around.
I want to revolve the
whole sky and then
I'll have a match between
sky and ground work.
Well, the most obvious way to do
it is look at Draco at sunset.
There's Draco coming down.
But at the time when it is
matching these structures,
it's under the horizon which
means you just couldn't
have seen it from Angkor.
Well, there's one
other way we can
see if Draco lines up properly.
And that's to go back in time.
2,000 3,000, 4,000, 5,000,
6,000, 7,000, 8,000, 9,000,
10,500 BC.
Now, that is very, very spooky.
That is very strange
because there it is--
Draco.
We find that the
constellation is in absolutely
the right position in the sky.
The Angkor we see now was built
less than 1,000 years ago.
But the pattern of the
temples on the ground
matches the sky image of
the constellation of Draco
in 10,500 BC.
It's a mystery with
huge implications.
Far away in Egypt,
the Great Pyramids
map the constellation of
Orion, which stands directly
opposite Draco in the sky.
For the two most impressive
science of the ancient world
to mirror that direct
opposites in heaven
must be the result
of a grand design.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Egypt is full of hints and
memories that connect it
to an earlier age, the Golden
Age called the First Time.
I believe that the many
myths that speak of it
refer to a real
era of prehistory
and that astronomy may help
us to put a date on it.
Central to that far-off
era is the most famous god
in the Egyptian
pantheon, the god Osiris.
And this is his temple,
built about 3,300 years ago.
The myths say Osiris
came down from heaven
to rule Egypt in the
First Time and that he
was the teacher of mankind.
Murdered by 72
conspirators, he was reborn
as the star god Orion, ruling
over the afterlife kingdom
in the sky.
His son, Horace, usually
depicted as falcon-headed,
avenged the murder and restored
his father's Earthly kingdom.
The pharaohs who
inherited that kingdom
hoped to equip themselves to
make a journey after death
to join Osiris in the
sky and become immortal.
>> Osiris had ruled
in the First Time.
And this notion of
time kept growing
in my head-- time, time.
I began to feel that they
were telling us, in a way,
that the journey of the pharaoh
was to go to the First Time,
that it's--
>> Robert Bauval showed me
on the computer how he dated
the First Time.
So not just a
journey to the stars,
but a journey to the
stars in a specific time.
>> In a specific time frame.
Osiris had come down to
Earth, had established
that king of the First Time.
I began to see the pyramid
field as that kingdom.
And I began to reason
out where the stars do
have the First Time through
the precession cycle and.
Now, as you get the
motion of precession,
the effect on the
stars is that they
will reach a maximum height
and a minimum height.
>> Like a seesaw.
>> Like a seesaw, up and down.
So I decide to take the
stars down to their lowest
possible location, which
would imply a beginning
of a cycle, the First Time.
>> And in order to do that,
you have to go back in time--
>> Back in time.
>> --on a computer.
>> So what you are saying is you
are open to the idea that they
had understood precession, even
though all Egyptologists deny
it.
>> I am utterly convinced that
they understood precession.
But I'm also convinced that
either they have kept records
or they had the
process of passing
through the knowledge
of the changing skies
through the centuries from
generation to generation.
>> In a sense, the sky--
What Bauval is suggesting
is that the pyramid builders
of Giza in 2,500
BC must have known
about the patterns of the
stars as they had appeared
in much more ancient times.
This could explain why the three
pyramids representing the three
stars of Orion's belt form
a diagonal of 45 degrees
to due north-south.
Bauval established that the
stars on which the pyramids are
modeled were last seen in this
arrangement in 10,500 BC, when
they were at the lowest point
of the processional cycle,
the First Time.
>> What the astronomy is telling
us is that we have to consider
the date of 10,500 BC.
>> Amazingly, that's
the exact date--
10,500 BC-- spelled out by
the astronomy of Angkor.
>> You'll find that the stars
actually adjust themselves
precisely in the pattern of
the pyramids on the ground.
I could not accept
this as a coincidence.
They have designs, a scheme
that fitted the First Time.
The whole thing fitted.
The pharaoh wanted to return
to the golden age of Osiris.
There was a land
locked in that time.
>> We know that the Pyramids
were completed around 2,500 BC,
but use astronomy to commemorate
the First Time of 10,500 BC.
But the Great Sphinx, which
now needs constant repair,
may actually be
thousands of years
older than previously thought.
The Sphinx is mute
and anonymous.
There are no texts contemporary
with its construction
that tell us who built
it or why it was built
or when it was built.
It leaves us guessing.
And in all honesty, it
leaves the Egyptologists
guessing, too.
They believe they know
when the Sphinx was built
and who built it.
They believe it was
built in 2,500 BC,
during the Fourth Dynasty.
And it's true that a
massive amount of work
was done at this site
during the Fourth Dynasty.
But is it safe to assume from
that that the Sphinx was also
built during the Fourth
Dynasty when no text tells us
that it was?
One major clue comes from
the work of John Anthony West
and Professor Robert Schoch
of Boston University.
They've shown that
these curious weathering
patterns on the trench that
surrounds the Sphinx, which
was, of course, carved out at
the same time as the Sphinx
itself, and on the
body of the Sphinx
could only have been caused by
exposure to thousands of years
of heavy, heavy rainfall.
These vertical fissures
are created by water
pouring down off the
edge of the plateau
and cutting out a
vertical channel.
And these scooped,
undulating patterns
are characteristic of
rainfall weathering.
The problem is that in
2,500 BC, when Egyptologists
think that the Sphinx
was built, Egypt
was as bone dry as it is
today and the climate couldn't
possibly have caused this
special kind of weathering.
You have to go back to a
time when Egypt was green
and heavy rains fell on it
to find the conditions that
could have weathered the
Sphinx and its enclosure
in this special way.
And that was thousands of
years before the first pharaoh
of the First Dynasty ever
sat on the throne of Egypt.
>> Basically, what you
have on the Giza Plateau,
which is on the
edge of the Sahara,
are two different types
of erosional features--
one we can correlate
with wind erosion,
which is a damn original feature
today since it's a desert
and you just have a lot of wind.
And then there's this
other erosional feature
which is correlated with
precipitation, with rain
running down on the rocks.
And you don't have rain in
that area since about 3,000 BC.
Yet, you have this
erosional feature
that erosional future happens
to be on the body of the Sphinx.
>> Initially, after a
week of informal work,
Schoch was pretty well convinced
that the water weathering
theory had to be correct.
We then went public with it
at the Geological Society
of America's convention in 1991.
And that, of course, brought
all the press in and Schoch,
by this point, basically staked
his reputation on the water
weathering to the Sphinx and the
implications that that carries.
>> Conservatively, I would
estimate the beginning
of the Sphinx, oldest
portion of the Sphinx,
to 5,000 to 7,000 BC.
That's the number
I basically use.
Other people have pushed
it back even further.
And honestly, it is possible
that it could be older.
>> You know how many people
comes back to me every day with
a theory?
>> I'm sure many.
>> At least every day
that is one new theory.
If you will really
give permissions
to everyone who have a
theory to investigate that,
it will be, really, a riot
without evidence about--
>> Zahi Hawass is Chief
Inspector of antiquities
at Giza.
>> You've found a piece from
the land, and you've found--
>> Nothing gets done here
without his approval.
He's the country's most
influential Egyptologist.
He rejects any radical
re-dating of the Sphinx.
Hawass took me to parts of
the monument that are normally
strictly off-limits.
He wanted to drive
home his opposition
to the geological heresy.
>> If the heavy rain is
showing what's happening here
and what's happening
to the Sphinx,
then this is what's
cut at the time.
I'm not really convinced
in that since Schoch
is the only geologist
who is saying that.
>> He's been
supported by others.
>> Like who?
>> Many hundreds, actually,
the Geological Congress
of America--
>> But in the same time, many
hundreds who came here really
to see that on-site, they did
not really agree with that.
>> A lot of geologists, they
see it as pretty self-evident
or obvious once
they see the data.
Where I've run into oppositions
with the Egyptological,
the classic Egyptologists
and a few geologists
or geoarchaeologists
who have been working
with the Egyptologists,
who in some cases
have told me very bluntly they
never even considered that--
they were going
under the assumption
that the Sphinx was
such and such an age
because that's what the
Egyptologists told them.
>> A Sphinx in that
time, 10,000 years ago,
what kind of civilization
can do a Sphinx in that time?
>> Both sides, your side as
well, are offering theories,
not facts.
>> But my side is really
offering theories based on what
we discover here.
All our fears is
connecting with archeology.
But the theory of
the 10,000 years
is connecting with
really nothing.
>> They've been trying to pick
holes in it, unsuccessfully,
I would say.
But yeah, they don't like it.
They feel it's
one turf intruding
on the turf, one
discipline intruding
on another discipline.
>> The archaeologists and
the geologists can argue,
but when you add in the
discipline of astronomy,
I believe the evidence for
an older Sphinx becomes
assailable.
The Sphinx is
aligned perfectly due
east with its gaze
targeting the rising sun
at dawn on the spring equinox.
Now, if I'd stood
here in 2,500 BC
when the Sphinx is supposed
to have been built,
gazing east in
line with its gaze
at dawn on the spring
equinox, I would
have seen the
constellation of Taurus
the bull rising in direct line
with the gaze of the Sphinx.
The logic of the
astronomy suggests
that if the Sphinx
was built then,
it should not have been
built in the shape of a lion,
but in the shape of a bull.
If we wind the skies
back to ancient times,
we find there's only one period
when the Sphinx would have
gazed at its own celestial
counterpart, the constellation
of Leo, at dawn on
the spring equinox.
That period wasn't 2,500 BC.
It was 10,500 BC.
There is much here that defies
conventional interpretation.
The links to Angkor
are baffling, formed
by star last seen in 10,500 BC.
Due north at that moment was
the constellation of Draco,
in the pattern modeled
by the Angkor temples.
Due east was the constellation
of Leo, twinned by the Sphinx.
Due south was the belt of
Orion, mimicked by the Pyramids.
It almost feels as though some
great secret game confronts us,
one handed down by
a lost civilization.
I think I've fixed
that civilization
in time, 10,500 BC.
But I still don't
know what it is
they're trying to communicate.
I know there's more to
discover from the depths
of the sea of Japan, where a
structure that looks man-made
also points to that
recurring date of 10,500 BC.
I know that I'm looking
for a civilization that
was able to impose its
influence in widely
separated parts of the world.
That means a civilization of
navigators and seafarers, one
that was determined to preserve
the treasure of its knowledge
and to pass it
down to the future
so that it would
never be forgotten.
[MUSIC PLAYING]